Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



ANNOUNCING OUR $100M SERIES B FUNDING TO BUILD LONG-TERM MEMORY FOR AI

Apr 26, 2023 - in Company
Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F5c46037688fd7e45a2ba7d034ce35ef4cefd3bcb-230x230.png&w=3840&q=100]

Founder & CEO

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dear Pinecone Community,



I am thrilled to share some exciting news with you all. We raised $100 million
in Series B funding, led by Andreessen Horowitz, with participation from ICONIQ
Growth, and our existing investors Menlo Ventures and Wing Venture Capital. This
funding brings our valuation to $750 million, hitting another milestone in our
journey to revolutionize how AI applications are built.



It has been an incredible ride for Pinecone since we introduced the in 2021. Our
innovative technology and rapid growth have disrupted the $9 billion search
infrastructure market and made us a critical component of the fast-growing $110
billion Generative AI market. Pinecone’s vector database enables engineers to
work with data generated and consumed by Large Language Models (LLMs) and other
AI models, making it an essential infrastructure technology for building
scalable, reliable, and accurate AI products.



The rise of generative AI propelled Pinecone to become an integral part of the
software stack for AI applications. In Q1 2023, we experienced explosive growth
in AI developers and innovators building amazing applications on Pinecone’s free
plan. We also saw a massive increase in paying customers across all industries
and sizes, including leading companies like Shopify, Gong, HubSpot, and Zapier.
Our success is a testament to the growing demand for AI infrastructure and our
ability to provide scalable solutions to the most pressing challenges in the
field.



We are immensely proud to have Andreessen Horowitz lead this funding round and
to have the continued support of our existing investors. With this funding, we
are well-equipped to capitalize on our hypergrowth and cement our leadership
position amidst the AI revolution that is transforming every line of business
and creating new ones, from AI search to AI chatbots to AI agents, and beyond.



Pinecone’s mission is to provide the Long Term Memory for AI, and we are well on
our way to achieving that. Our self-onboarding product, efficient growth engine,
and world-class team are here to power the next wave of AI-powered innovation.
We are excited to support the fundamental shifts in the way companies approach
data management in the era of AI.



I want to express my deepest gratitude to our incredible team of deeply
committed superstars, to our loyal and brilliant customers, to our steadfast
partners, and to our phenomenal investors for their unwavering support. Thank
you for your work, dedication, and belief in Pinecone’s mission. We have come a
long way together but we are just getting started…



As we look to the future, we are filled with optimism and confidence. Pinecone
is at the forefront of the AI revolution, and we are committed to empowering
developers with the tools they need to build groundbreaking AI applications that
will transform industries and improve lives.

Share via:


FURTHER READING


Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F5c46037688fd7e45a2ba7d034ce35ef4cefd3bcb-230x230.png&w=3840&q=100]

Founder & CEO


Share via:


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


WHAT WILL YOU BUILD?

Upgrade your search or chatbots applications with just a few lines of code.



Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.

