Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


v1v2

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Guides

v2

Ctrl+K
Release notes
All
Guides
Reference
Pages

START TYPING TO SEARCH…


GETTING STARTED

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


ORGANIZATIONS

 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 


PROJECTS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


INDEXES

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


DATA

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 


OPERATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


INTEGRATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


REFERENCE

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


SUPPORT

 * 
 * 
 * 


RELEASE NOTES



This document contains details about Pinecone releases. For information about
using specific features, see our .


JANUARY 2024


FEATURES

The gives you the same great vector database but with a drastically improved
developer experience. The most significant improvements include:

 * : With serverless indexes, you don't configure or manage compute and storage
   resources. You just load your data and your indexes scale automatically based
   on usage. Likewise, you don't pay for dedicated resources that may sometimes
   lay idle. Instead, the pricing model for serverless indexes is
   consumption-based: You pay only for the amount of data stored and operations
   performed, with no minimums.
   
   
   > ⚠️
   > 
   > WARNING
   > 
   > Serverless indexes are in public preview and are available only on AWS in
   > the us-west-2 region. Check the and test thoroughly before using serverless
   > indexes in production.

 * : Instead of choosing a cloud region for an entire project, you now in a
   project. This makes it possible to consolidate related indexes in the same
   project, even when they are hosted in different regions.

 * : Control plane operations like create_index, describe_index, and
   list_indexes now use a single global URL, https://api.pinecone.io, regardless
   of the cloud environment where an index is hosted. This simplifies the
   experience compared to the legacy API, where each environment has a unique
   URL.


SDKS

 * The latest versions of Pinecone's Python client (v3.0.0) and Node.js client
   (v2.0.0) support the new API mentioned above. To use the new API, existing
   users must upgrade to the new client versions and adapt some code. For
   guidance, see the and .

 * The latest version of the (v0.6.0) adds support for the new API mentioned
   above as well as namespaces, LLMs that do not have function calling
   functionality for query generation, and more. See the in Github for more
   details.


DOCUMENTATION

 * The Pinecone documentation is now versioned. The default "latest" version
   reflects the new Pinecone API mentioned above. The "legacy" version reflects
   the previous API, which requires regional URLs for control plane operations
   and does not support serverless indexes.


DECEMBER 2023


FEATURES

 * The free Starter plan now supports up to 100 namespaces. let you partition
   vectors within an index to speed up queries or comply with requirements.


NOVEMBER 2023


FEATURES

 * The new is an open-source, distributed system that performs
   vector-database-enabled semantic search over Postgres records. You can use it
   as a learning resource or as a starting point for high-scale use cases.


SDKS

 * is a new open-source Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) framework and
   context engine built on top of Pinecone. It enables you to start chatting
   with your documents or text data with a few simple commands.
   
   The latest version of the Canopy SDK (v0.2.0) adds support for OpenAI SDK
   v1.2.3. See the in Github for more details.


BILLING

 * Pinecone is now registered to collect Value Added Tax (VAT) or Goods and
   Services Tax (GST) for accounts based in various global regions. If
   applicable, add your VAT or GST number to your account under Settings >
   Billing.


OCTOBER 2023


FEATURES

 * are now generally available (GA).


REGIONS

 * Pinecone Azure support via the is now generally available (GA).


SDKS

 * The latest version of our Node SDK is v1.1.2. See the in Github for more
   details.


CONSOLE

 * The Index Browser is now available in the console. This allows you to
   preview, query, and filter by metadata directly from the console. The Index
   Browser can be found within the index detail page.

 * We’re improved the design of our metrics page to include new charts for
   record and error count plus additional latencies (p90, p99) to help triage
   and understand issues.


INTEGRATIONS

 * Knowledge Base for Amazon Bedrock is now available in Private Preview.
   Integrate your enterprise data via retrieval augmented generation (RAG) when
   building search and GenAI applications. .

 * Pinecone Sink Connector for Confluent is now available in Public Preview.
   Gain access to data streams from across your business to build a real-time
   knowledge base for your AI applications. .


BILLING

 * You can now .


PRIVACY

 * Pinecone is now HIPAA compliant across all of our cloud providers (AWS,
   Azure, and GCP).


SEPTEMBER 11, 2023

Pinecone Azure support via the is now generally available (GA).


AUGUST 14, 2023

Pinecone now supports deploying projects to Azure using the new . This is a
public preview environment, so test thoroughly before deploying to production.


JUNE 21, 2023

The new gcp-starter region is now in public preview. This region has distinct
limitations from other Starter Plan regions. gcp-starter is the default region
for some new users.


APRIL 26, 2023

now support approximately 100,000 1536-dimensional embeddings with metadata.
Capacity is proportional for other dimensionalities.


APRIL 3, 2023

Pinecone now supports .


MARCH 21, 2023

Pinecone now supports SSO for Enterprise dedicated customers. Contact us at to
set up your integration.


MARCH 1, 2023

Pinecone now supports .


FEBRUARY 22, 2023


SPARSE-DENSE EMBEDDINGS ARE NOW IN PUBLIC PREVIEW.

Pinecone now supports . To use sparse-dense embeddings in Python, upgrade to
Python client version 2.2.0.


PINECONE PYTHON CLIENT VERSION 2.2.0 IS AVAILABLE

Python client version 2.2.0 with support for sparse-dense embeddings is now
available on and .


FEBRUARY 15, 2023


NEW NODE.JS CLIENT IS NOW AVAILABLE IN PUBLIC PREVIEW

You can now try out our new .


FEBRUARY 14, 2023


NEW USAGE REPORTS IN THE PINECONE CONSOLE

You can now monitor your current and projected Pinecone usage with the .


JANUARY 31, 2023


PINECONE IS NOW AVAILABLE IN AWS MARKETPLACE

You can now .


JANUARY 3, 2023


PINECONE PYTHON CLIENT VERSION 2.1.0 IS NOW AVAILABLE ON GITHUB.

The makes the following changes:

 * Fixes "Connection Reset by peer" error after long idle periods
 * Adds typing and explicit names for arguments in all client operations
 * Adds docstrings to all client operations
 * Adds Support for batch upserts by passing batch_size to the upsert method
 * Improves gRPC query results parsing performance


DECEMBER 22, 2022


PINECONE IS NOW AVAILABLE IN GCP MARKETPLACE

You can now .


DECEMBER 6, 2022


ORGANIZATIONS ARE GENERALLY AVAILABLE

Pinecone now features , which allow one or more users to control billing and
project settings across multiple projects owned by the same organization.


P2 POD TYPE IS GENERALLY AVAILABLE

The is now generally available and ready for production workloads. p2 pods are
now available in the Starter plan and support the .


PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENTS

 * are now up to 10x faster in many circumstances.

 * is now faster.


OCTOBER 31, 2022


HYBRID SEARCH (EARLY ACCESS)

Pinecone now supports keyword-aware semantic search with the new indexes and
endpoints. Hybrid search enables improved relevance for semantic search results
by combining them with keyword search.

This is an early access feature and is available only by .


OCTOBER 17, 2022


STATUS PAGE

The new displays information about the status of the Pinecone service, including
the status of individual cloud regions and a log of recent incidents.


SEPTEMBER 16, 2022


PUBLIC COLLECTIONS

You can now , which are collections containing public data from real-world data
sources. Currently, public collections include the Glue - SSTB collection, the
TREC Question classification collection, and the SQuAD collection.


AUGUST 16, 2022


COLLECTIONS (PUBLIC PREVIEW)("BETA")

You can now using . After you create a collection from an index, you can create
a new index from that collection. The new index can use any pod type and any
number of pods. Collections only consume storage.

This is a public preview feature and is not appropriate for production
workloads.


VERTICAL SCALING

You can now for a live index to accommodate more vectors or queries without
interrupting reads or writes. The p1 and s1 pod types are now available in : 1x,
2x, 4x, and 8x. Capacity and compute per pod double with each size increment.


P2 POD TYPE (PUBLIC PREVIEW)("BETA")

The new provides search speeds of around 5ms and throughput of 200 queries per
second per replica, or approximately 10x faster speeds and higher throughput
than the p1 pod type, depending on your data and network conditions.

This is a public preview feature and is not appropriate for production
workloads.


IMPROVED P1 AND S1 PERFORMANCE

The and pod types now offer approximately 50% higher query throughput and 50%
lower latency, depending on your workload.


JULY 26, 2022

You can now specify a to get results for a subset of the vectors in your index
by calling with a object.

The describe_index_stats operation now uses the POST HTTP request type. The
filter parameter is only accepted by describe_index_stats calls using the POST
request type. Calls to describe_index_stats using the GET request type are now
deprecated.


JULY 12, 2022


PINECONE CONSOLE GUIDED TOUR

You can now choose to follow a guided tour in the . This interactive tutorial
walks you through creating your first index, upserting vectors, and querying
your data. The purpose of the tour is to show you all the steps you need to
start your first project in Pinecone.


JUNE 24, 2022


UPDATED RESPONSE CODES

The , , and scale_index operations now use more specific HTTP response codes
that describe the type of operation that succeeded.


JUNE 7, 2022


SELECTIVE METADATA INDEXING

You can now store more metadata and more unique metadata values! and which
fields you only wish to store and retrieve. When you index metadata fields, you
can filter vector search queries using those fields. When you store metadata
fields without indexing them, you keep memory utilization low, especially when
you have many unique metadata values, and therefore can fit more vectors per
pod.


SINGLE-VECTOR QUERIES

You can now . We now encourage all users to query using a single vector rather
than a batch of vectors, because batching queries can lead to long response
messages and query times, and single queries execute just as fast on the server
side.


QUERY BY ID

You can now . This is useful when you want to search for the nearest neighbors
of a vector that is already stored in Pinecone.


IMPROVED INDEX FULLNESS ACCURACY

The index fullness metric in results is now more accurate.


APRIL 25, 2022


PARTIAL UPDATES (PUBLIC PREVIEW)

You can now perform a by ID and individual value pairs. This allows you to
update individual metadata fields without having to upsert a matching vector or
update all metadata fields at once.


NEW METRICS

Users on all plans can now see metrics for the past one (1) week in the Pinecone
console. Users on the Enterprise and Enterprise Dedicated plan now have access
to the following metrics via the :

 * pinecone_vector_count
 * pinecone_request_count_total
 * pinecone_request_error_count_total
 * pinecone_request_latency_seconds
 * pinecone_index_fullness (Public Preview)

Note: The accuracy of the pinecone_index_fullness metric is improved. This may
result in changes from historic reported values. This metric is in public
preview.


SPARK CONNECTOR

Spark users who want to manage parallel upserts into Pinecone can now use the to
upsert their data from a Spark dataframe.


SUPPORT FOR BOOLEAN AND FLOAT METADATA IN PINECONE INDEXES

You can now add Boolean and float64 values to


NEW STATE FIELD IN DESCRIBE_INDEX RESULTS

The operation results now contain a value for state, which describes the state
of the index. The possible values for state are Initializing, ScalingUp,
ScalingDown, Terminating, and Ready.


DELETE BY METADATA FILTER

The operation now supports filtering my metadata.

Updated 5 days ago

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Did this page help you?
Yes
No
 * 
 * * * 
     * 
     * 
   * * 
   * * 
     * 
     * 
   * * 
     * 
     * 
     * 
     * 
     * 
     * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 







Pinecone [https://pinecone.io/images/pinecone-white.svg]
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA | | | | | |

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.


