Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



FRONTIER MEDICINES AND PINECONE: PIONEERING THE USE OF SUPER LARGE VECTOR
DATABASES IN HEALTHCARE

logo
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2Fdb3d8a0a41d1c8ea44357b6cd1b324ff763c5f09-704x176.png&w=3840&q=75]

Frontier Medicines is a precision medicine company pioneering groundbreaking
medicines to transform treatment for genetically-defined patient populations,
starting with oncology and immunology. They use Pinecone to supercharge their
usage of vector embeddings— specifically impactful for similarity searches over
billions of vectorized molecules.

Industry

Healthcare

Use Cases

Semantic Search

Cloud

AWS

Tens of Billions

molecule vectors

Increased Efficiency

in vector searches

is a precision medicine company pioneering groundbreaking medicines to transform
treatment for genetically-defined patient populations, starting with oncology
and immunology. The company’s proprietary chemoproteomics powered drug discovery
engine, the , leverages machine learning paired with covalent chemistry to
unlock hard-to-treat disease causing proteins for drug development.

The Frontier platform is powered in part by data from its mass spectrometry
driven chemoproteomics, generating terabytes of data a day. In the last five
years, Frontier has measured hundreds of millions of covalent molecule proteome
interaction data and strategically invested in the generation of covalent
chemical property data. Together, these data represent an unprecedented large
data set for covalent drug discovery.

Leveraging these high value and high quality data, Frontier has developed key AI
algorithms to drive the discovery of novel medicines against historically
“undruggable” targets. Chemoproteomics focused algorithms inform and guide
targeting strategies for nearly every protein in the human proteome. In
addition, medicinal chemistry focused algorithms including large-language-models
and generative AI approaches drive the optimization of compounds from within
Frontier’s highly curated library.

Large scale similarity searches over billions of vectorized items including
molecules is an important step in this process and Pinecone serverless enabled
Frontier to perform those searches with superior performance while being cost
effective.

Solution


PINECONE OFFERS NEXT GENERATION VECTOR EMBEDDED MOLECULE SEARCH

Frontier Medicines turned to Pinecone to take advantage of Pinecone’s handling
of vectors at a large scale with automatic resource management.

With Pinecone, Frontier Medicines supercharged their usage of vector
—specifically impactful for molecule searches. First, Frontier leveraged a
proprietary transformer model to generate molecule specific vectors for billions
of molecules, then Pinecone enabled optimizing the entire search process.

As their usage of Pinecone evolved, Frontier Medicines wanted to explore the
ability to search across molecular datasets. Facing the challenging requirements
of a billion-scale complex dataset, the Frontier Machine Learning team delved
into the capabilities of the newly introduced . During a private preview period,
the team tested the recently available architecture, which allowed them to
leverage vector storage at any scale while lowering costs for higher
availability.



> The introduction of Pinecone serverless has led to amazing performance and
> efficiency improvements in our vector search capability. We will continue to
> push forward searching Billions of vectors with Pinecone serverless at the
> center.” - Johannes Hermann PhD, Chief Technology Officer, Frontier Medicines

result


SCALING DRUG DISCOVERY WITH PINECONE SERVERLESS

Frontier Medicines wanted a more scalable solution to support the generation of
molecular insights across billions of molecules. The team needed to store a
large collection of vectors representing molecules to be able to process and
find insights for their projects. Here, the query needs were not always large in
nature, but also frequent and smaller and focused. With Pinecone serverless,
Frontier Medicines has been able to continue rapidly:

 * Building at any scale: Pinecone serverless has enabled the team to scale up
   to tens of billions of vectors. With this advanced architecture, they could
   substantially expand their molecular semantic search effectively, enabling
   precise searches within specific namespaces based on molecular
   characteristics.
 * Accessing easiest-to-use technology: This developer-first experience allowed
   Frontier Medicines to push the envelope in using large scale molecule vector
   spaces for searches and machine learning. Pinecone is key to enabling that
   large level of scale, making manual resource provisioning a thing of the
   past.


A VISION FOR BROADER IMPACT

Frontier Medicines has continued significant enhancements in their ability to
search large vector spaces since transitioning to Pinecone serverless:

 * Scale to tens of billions of molecule vectors with precise performance:
   sub-second searches achieved in near real-time usage
 * Increased efficiency in vector searches

Frontier’s utilization of Pinecone serverless has enabled Frontier to enter a
new dimension of search space and laid the foundation for future scalability and
innovation as the company continues to expand its leadership in developing
breakthrough precision medicines.

Share via:

Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F395aa87bf83fb1453dcaf7708ada8b376b1ee24e-1340x1516.jpg&w=3840&q=100]

Pinecone Customer Marketing

Jump to section

 * 
 * 


WHAT WILL YOU BUILD?

Upgrade your search or chatbots applications with just a few lines of code.



Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.

