Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


v1v2

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Guides

v2

Ctrl+K
Security
All
Guides
Reference
Pages

START TYPING TO SEARCH…


GETTING STARTED

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


ORGANIZATIONS

 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 


PROJECTS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


INDEXES

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


DATA

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 


OPERATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


INTEGRATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


REFERENCE

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


SUPPORT

 * 
 * 
 * 


SECURITY



OVERVIEW

This document describes the security protocols and practices in use by Pinecone.


API KEYS

Each Pinecone has one or more API keys. In order to make calls to the Pinecone
API, a user must provide a valid API key for the relevant Pinecone project.


ROLE-BASED ACCESS CONTROLS (RBAC)

Each Pinecone can assign users roles with respect to the organization and
projects within the organization. These roles determine what permissions users
have to make changes to the organization's billing, projects, and other users.
To learn more, see .


ORGANIZATION SINGLE SIGN-ON (SSO)

SSO allows organizations to manage their teams' access to Pinecone through their
identity management solution. Once your integration is configured, you can
require that users from your domain sign in through SSO, and you can specify a
default role for teammates when they sign up. Only organizations in the
Enterprise dedicated tier can set up SSO. To set up your SSO integration,
contact Pinecone support at .


END-TO-END ENCRYPTION (E2EE)

Pinecone provides end-to-end encryption for user data, including encryption in
transit and at rest.


ENCRYPTION IN TRANSIT

Pinecone uses standard protocols to encrypt user data in transit. Clients open
HTTPS or gRPC connections to the Pinecone API; the Pinecone API gateway uses
gRPC connections to user deployments in the cloud. These HTTPS and gRPC
connections use the TLS 1.2 protocol with 256-bit Advanced Encryption Standard
(AES-256) encryption. See Fig. 1 below.

Figure 1: Pinecone encryption in transit

Diagram showing encryption protocols for user data in transit
[https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pinecone-io/img/main/encryption-in-transit-2.png]

Traffic is also encrypted in transit between the Pinecone backend and cloud
infrastructure services, such as S3 and GCS. For more information, see and .


ENCRYPTION AT REST

Pinecone encrypts stored data using the 256-bit Advanced Encryption Standard
(AES-256) encryption algorithm.

Updated about 1 month ago

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Did this page help you?
Yes
No
 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * * 
     * 
   * 







Pinecone [https://pinecone.io/images/pinecone-white.svg]
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA | | | | | |

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.


