Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


v1v2

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Guides

v1

Ctrl+K
Understanding cost
All
Guides
Reference
Pages

START TYPING TO SEARCH…


GETTING STARTED

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


ORGANIZATIONS

 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 


PROJECTS

 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * 


INDEXES

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


DATA

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 


OPERATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


INTEGRATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


REFERENCE

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


SUPPORT

 * 
 * 
 * 


UNDERSTANDING COST



OVERVIEW

This topic describes the calculation of total cost for Pinecone, including an
example. All prices are examples; for the latest pricing details, please see our
. While our pricing page lists rates on an hourly basis for ease of comparison,
this topic lists prices per minute, as this is how Pinecone calculates billing.


HOW DOES PINECONE CALCULATE COSTS?

For each index, billing is determined by the per-minute price per pod and the
number of pods the index uses, regardless of index activity. The per-minute
price varies by pod type, pod size, account plan, and cloud region.

Total cost depends on a combination of factors:

 * Pod type. Each has different per-minute pricing.
 * Number of pods. This includes replicas, which duplicate pods.
 * Pod size. Larger pod sizes have proportionally higher costs per minute.
 * Total pod-minutes. This includes the total time each pod is running, starting
   at pod creation and rounded up to 15-minute increments.
 * Cloud provider. The cost per pod-type and pod-minute varies depending on the
   cloud provider you choose for your project.
 * Collection storage. Collections incur costs per GB of data per minute in
   storage, rounded up to 15-minute increments.
 * Plan. The free plan incurs no costs; the Standard or Enterprise plans incur
   different costs per pod-type, pod-minute, cloud provider, and collection
   storage.

The following equation calculates the total costs accrued over time:

(Number of pods) * (pod size) * (number of replicas) * (minutes pod exists) *
(pod price per minute)

 * (collection storage in GB) * (collection storage time in minutes) *
   (collection storage price per GB per minute)

To see a calculation of your current usage and costs, see the in the Pinecone
console.


EXAMPLE TOTAL COST CALCULATION

An example application has the following requirements:

 * 1,000,000 vectors with 1536 dimensions
 * 150 queries per second with top_k = 10
 * Deployment in an EU region
 * Ability to store 1GB of inactive vectors

, the organization chooses to configure the project to use the Standard billing
plan to host one p1.x2 pod with three replicas and a collection containing 1 GB
of data. This project runs continuously for the month of January on the Standard
plan. The components of the total cost for this example are given in Table 1
below:

Table 1: Example billing components

Billing componentValueNumber of pods1Number of replicas3Pod sizex2Total pod
count6Minutes in January44,640Pod-minutes (pods * minutes)267,840Pod price per
minute$0.0012Collection storage1 GBCollection storage minutes44,640Price per
storage minute$0.00000056

The invoice for this example is given in Table 2 below:

Table 2: Example invoice

ProductQuantityPrice per unitChargeCollections44,640$0.00000056$0.025P2 Pods
(AWS)0$0.00P2 Pods (GCP)0$0.00S1 Pods0$0.00P1 Pods267,840$0.0012$514.29

Amount due $514.54


COST CONTROLS

Pinecone offers tools to help you understand and control your costs.

 * Monitoring usage. Using the in the Pinecone console, you can monitor your
   Pinecone usage and costs as these accrue.

 * Pod limits. Pinecone project owners can across all indexes in the project.
   The default pod limit is 5.


NEXT STEPS

 * Learn about
 * Learn about

Updated 28 days ago

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Did this page help you?
Yes
No
 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 







Pinecone [https://pinecone.io/images/pinecone-white.svg]
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA | | | | | |

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.


