Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



AN (OPINIONATED) CHECKLIST TO CHOOSE A VECTOR DATABASE

Sep 13, 2023

Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F6d0c22de734e65c089fcee0d2e924af2e8e4301e-484x444.png&w=3840&q=100]

Senior Product Marketing Manager

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We previously discussed why is the most cost-effective and scalable option to .
And there is no RAG without .

Years ago, Edo Liberty, Pinecone’s founder and CEO, saw the tremendous power of
combining AI models with vector search and launched Pinecone, creating the
vector database (DB) category. In November 2022, the release of ChatGPT ushered
in unprecedented interest in AI and a flurry of new vector DBs.

If your company has decided to fully embrace Generative AI and plans to use a
vector database, the number of options out there can be daunting. Choosing a
vector database is no simple feat, and we want to help. Being associated with
Pinecone, this article will be a bit biased with Pinecone-only examples. But our
criteria - from working with more than 4,000 engineering teams including large
Fortune 500 enterprises and high-growth startups with 10B+ vector embeddings -
apply to the broad industry.

You might just get started with building a small AI application, but think big.
AI is to deliver trillions of dollars across many use cases including customer
operations, marketing and sales, software engineering, and R&D. In the near
future, AI will be in the veins of all parts of your business. This means the
scalability of a vector database is crucial for sustainable success because it
will support all the AI use cases you will be developing.

To make a holistic evaluation, review these three categories: technology,
developer experience, and enterprise readiness. Let’s take a closer look at each
category and see what questions you need to ask for better decision-making.

Vector Database Considerations
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/ccd96b42ba68ee4b127c2a27137125b0a3c31e0d-1390x343.jpg]
Vector Database Considerations


TECHNOLOGY

The technology at the core of any vector DB will affect its performance, scale,
and cost.

Vector Database Technology
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/eed0746eb1dcdceba1934d8a4c97668e7b20421b-1355x855.jpg]
Vector Database Technology


PERFORMANCE

 * Data freshness: How long does it take for you to query the new data? Your
   business could suffer if the data is not fresh. For example, if the new
   product information on e-commerce platforms doesn’t get updated in time, it
   will impact sales.
 * Query latency & query per second (QPS): How much time does it take to execute
   a query and receive the result? How many queries can the system process in
   one second? Those are very important if you want to build real-time
   applications like chatbots that delight customers.
 * : Namespaces are a way to segment data into distinct areas within your index.
   The intent is to have the ability for an index to serve multiple purposes.
   Searching by namespace allows you to search over a subset of data versus an
   entire dataset to reduce query latency. They also reduce the need for
   additional indexes by isolating segments of vectors within an index. Having
   namespaces help improve query performance and lower cost.


RELEVANCE

 * Accuracy: A vector DB uses a combination of different algorithms that all
   participate in the Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search, which allows it
   to search for the nearest item. Since vector DBs provide approximate results,
   there can be tradeoffs between accuracy and speed. However, a good system can
   provide ultra-fast search with great accuracy.
 * Hybrid search: You might want both semantic search and keyword search - - for
   specific use cases, and your provider should be able to support that.
   Pinecone uses the to support hybrid search. Our shows that hybrid search
   performs better on relevance compared to standalone keyword and semantic
   search.
 * : This is a way to add information to individual vectors to give them more
   meaning. By adding metadata to your vectors, you can filter by those fields
   at query time. This enables you to limit your vector search based on metadata
   and scope down queries, creating a faster and more accurate search.

For example, if you want to build a semantic search application for a large
corporation to search through internal documents, metadata filters allow you to
apply a set of conditions like dates and departments. Without metadata filters,
you’re more likely to get irrelevant docs - someone in HR doesn't likely need to
include engineering docs in their search.

There are different ways to do including pre-filtering and post-filtering.
Pinecone uses single-stage filtering, which produces the accurate results of
pre-filtering at even faster speeds than post-filtering.

 * Live index updates: Supporting live index updates for up-to-date data helps
   maintain data freshness, which is crucial for real-time applications like
   chatbots. If your provider doesn’t support live index updates, you could be
   waiting for hours for updates to appear in search results.


SCALABILITY

Scalability describes a system’s ability to grow. Figure out if there’s a limit
to the number of vector embeddings the DB provider can support and how you can
scale.

Most vector DBs allow you to scale both horizontally and vertically. Horizontal
scaling means adding resources to the existing system (scaling up), while
horizontal scaling involves adding additional servers (scaling out). Each option
has its pros and cons and needs to be evaluated case by case, but both require
manual actions.

In a perfect state, you can scale automatically and don’t need to worry about
how to scale at all because it’s all taken care of.


COST-EFFICIENCY

A great system delivers satisfactory speed and accuracy at a reasonable price,
not only for a small application but also when you scale to billions of
embeddings. Estimate the number of embeddings you want to scale to, and ask your
vendor what speed, accuracy, and price they can offer with your embedding
number.


DEVELOPER EXPERIENCE

You want a vector database that’s super easy for developers to get started with,
and deliver value for your business soon.

Vector Database Developer Experience
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/4d03cd5ef8fb17b01961482cef98c9f8b1510d9f-1227x608.png]
Vector Database Developer Experience
 * Easy and quick to start: How much work does your team need to do to get
   started with this database? Do they have easy-to-use APIs and SDKs for
   various clients? SDKs offer a collection of tools, libraries, and
   documentation that empower your developers to build faster. For example,
   Pinecone SDKs for Python and Node.js.
 * Time to value: How long does it take to build an application that works well
   in production to create business value? Find a provider that allows your team
   to ship a product-ready application very quickly.
 * : Does the documentation offer clear navigation, onboarding examples, and all
   the material to help your team master the database quickly?
 * Integrations:
    * Cloud availability - Is the service available in your preferred cloud
      provider?
    * LLM compatibility - Is the system compatible with different LLMs?
    * System integration - Can this new database integrate with your existing
      infrastructure effortlessly? Does the vendor already have a variety of
      integrated AI ecosystem partners?

 * User education: Does the vendor provide learning materials like blogs and ,
   examples, community events & support, etc., to help your team master the tool
   and understand the space?

If your developer coworkers are looking to learn and experiment with vector
databases, check out Pinecone’s and . The examples present many different AI
applications/patterns with runnable Jupyter Notebooks (a web-based interactive
computing platform) available for each pattern. You’ll also find tutorial videos
and a getting-started guide that your team can run for free on Google Collab,
which hosts and runs notebooks.

Combined with free tier, you have a free end-to-end solution for a developer to
run, view, modify and experiment with working code across most of the common AI
use cases in the field today.


ENTERPRISE-READY

Choosing a vector database that’s enterprise-ready, safeguarding your data, and
making operations easy.

Enterprise ready
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/d4e6cbdc003acc59d103d6014aa16878bcc39956-1152x597.jpg]
Enterprise ready
 * : Make sure your provider meets your security and operational requirements.
   For example, is the data encrypted at rest and in transit? Are they
   SOC-certified, GDPR-ready, and HIPAA-compliant?
 * Expertise: Can the solution provider work with you to design solutions for
   all your use cases? Are they up to date with the space to share helpful
   advice along your journey? If you’re new to the space, working with experts
   is key to success.
 * Availability: It’s important for your applications to run uninterrupted,
   especially when they’re customer-facing. Confirm if the provider can offer a
   service-level-agreement (SLA) that guarantees the uptime they can deliver. An
   SLA outlines the commitment between the service provider and the client and
   aligns every party’s expectations.
 * Technical support: Will you have a dedicated team to troubleshoot? When are
   they available?
 * Monitoring: Efficient vector database management requires a strong monitoring
   system to track performance, health, and status. Monitoring is crucial for
   problem detection, performance optimization, and smooth operations. Can this
   provider make monitoring easy for you? You can monitor Pinecone with to
   optimize performance, control usage and get automatic alerts on metrics.


WHAT’S NEXT

We hope this high-level evaluation list empowers you to make an informed
decision. The space is still young and rapidly evolving - if you still have
questions, Pinecone is here to help. to help you understand everything about
vector search and generative AI and design your best path forward. Move now and
get ahead of your competition.

Share via:


FURTHER READING


Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F6d0c22de734e65c089fcee0d2e924af2e8e4301e-484x444.png&w=3840&q=100]

Senior Product Marketing Manager

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

Share via:


Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.



DON'T MISS THE NEXT ONE...



Get an email the next time we publish an article about machine learning and
similarity search.

Get Updates