Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



MANAGE SERVERLESS COSTS WITH READ UNITS

Feb 1, 2024

Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F060a591e7197c2c61b0bc15f6a6b9f61d6340dca-800x800.jpg&w=3840&q=100]

Senior Developer Advocate

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With , you only . The separation of read and write paths inside the DB enables
this dynamic cost structure. This article illustrates how (RUs) work, so you can
better understand billing and monitor your usage.



In the future, we will take a deep dive into understanding RUs’ counterparts:
Write Units and Storage.



to explore the information in this article live.


WHAT ARE READ UNITS (RUS)?

RUs measure the resources consumed by read operations such as , , and .



An example of a query request would be sending a question to the DB (e.g., “What
is a dog?”) and getting vectors (and, optionally, metadata) returned. An example
of a fetch request would be sending a string of vector IDs to the DB to get
their associated vectors returned; and an example of a list request would be
requesting `n` number of vector IDs be returned.



Usage notes per endpoint:

 * Query
    * A query request uses a number of RUs that to the size of your .

 * Fetch
    * A fetch request , with a minimum of 1 RU.

 * List
    * Each list request (and each subsequent paginated list request) costs 1 RU.


HOW TO INSPECT RUS

Every read operation will have its . An example response would look like this:

{'matches': [{'id': 'c1eb2875-bd4e-449d-a059-232edb62c62a',
              'metadata': None,
              'score': 0.0,
              'sparse_values': {'indices': [], 'values': []},
              'values': []}],
'namespace': '50k',
 'usage': {'read_units': 5}}  # >>> Here are your RUs!




You can see above that whatever read operation produced the above result, it
consumed 5 RUs (“usage”: {“read_units”: 5}}).



See our to gain a deeper understanding of how different query configurations
lead to different RU spend.



To project future overall costs, use our .


SUBLINEAR COST GROWTH

While RUs are a function of the size of your namespace (the sheer number of
vectors, the dimensionality of those vectors, and the presence of any metadata),
they grow sublinearly with your namespace.



For example, if it costs 5 RUs to query a namespace with 50k, 1536-dimensional
vectors, the cost of querying an index 4x that size is not 20 RUs. Instead, it
will be approximately 8 RUs. This sublinear growth keeps costs low while
allowing you to scale quickly.



Pinecone’s specialized indexing and retrieval algorithms enable this sublinear
growth by clustering similar vectors together. At query time, only a subset of
the total namespace is searched. The result is sublinear growth of RU cost as
the total number of vectors in the namespace increases.



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Let us know what you think at .

Share via:


FURTHER READING


Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F060a591e7197c2c61b0bc15f6a6b9f61d6340dca-800x800.jpg&w=3840&q=100]

Senior Developer Advocate

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section
 * 
 * 
 * 

Share via:


Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.



DON'T MISS THE NEXT ONE...



Get an email the next time we publish an article about machine learning and
similarity search.

Get Updates