Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



CHATBOTS WITH PINECONE

Jun 23, 2023

Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F019f2985c40a0ed2cfca739bc92996133cb07a6c-200x200.jpg&w=3840&q=100]

Senior Product Marketing Manager

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


MAKE YOUR CHATBOT ANSWER RIGHT.



Companies have been using chatbot applications for years to provide responses to
their users. While early adopters were limited to providing responses based on
the information available to them at the time, foundational AI models like Large
Language Models (LLMs) have enabled chatbots to also consider the context and
relevance of a response. Today, AI-powered chatbots are able to make sense of
information across almost any topic, and provide the most relevant responses
possible.

With continued advancements in AI, companies can now leverage AI models built
specifically for chatbot use cases — chatbot models — to automatically generate
relevant and personalized responses. This class of AI is referred to as
generative AI.

Generative AI has transformed the world of search, enabling chatbots to have
more human-like interactions with their users. Chatbot models (e.g. OpenAI’s
ChatGPT) combined with vector databases (e.g. Pinecone) are leading the charge
on democratizing AI for chatbot applications, enabling users of any size — from
hobbyists to large enterprises — to incorporate the power of generative AI to a
wide range of use cases.


CHATBOT USE CASES

Chatbots trained on the latest AI models have access to an extensive worldview,
and when paired with the long-term memory of a vector database like Pinecone,
they can generate and provide highly relevant, grounded responses — particularly
for niche or proprietary topics. Companies rely on these AI-powered chatbots for
a variety of applications and use cases.


EXAMPLES:

 * Technical support: Resolve technical issues faster by generating accurate and
   helpful documentation or instructions for your users to follow.
 * Self-serve knowledgebase: Save time and boost productivity for your teams by
   enabling them to quickly answer questions and gather information from an
   internal knowledgebase.
 * Shopping assistant: Improve your customer experience by helping shoppers
   better navigate the site, explore product offerings, and successfully find
   what they are looking for.


CHALLENGES WHEN BUILDING AI-POWERED CHATBOTS:

There are many benefits to chatbot models such as enabling applications to
improve the efficiency and accuracy of searching for information. However, when
it comes to building and managing an AI-powered chatbot application, there can
be challenges when responding to industry specific or internal queries,
especially at large scale. Some common limitations include:

 * Hallucinations: If the chatbot model doesn’t have access to proprietary or
   niche data, it will hallucinate answers for things it doesn’t know or have
   context for. This means users will receive the wrong answer. And without
   citations to verify the source of the content, it can be difficult to confirm
   whether or not a certain response is hallucinated.
 * Context limits: Chatbot models need context with every prompt to improve
   answer quality and relevance, but there’s a size limit to how much additional
   context a query can support.
 * High query latencies: Adding context to chatbot models is expensive and time
   consuming. More context means more processing and consumption, so adding long
   contexts to embeddings can be prohibitive.
 * Inefficient knowledge updates: AI models require many tens of thousands of
   high-cost GPU training hours to retrain on up-to-date information. And once
   the training process completes, the AI model is stuck in a “frozen” version
   of the world it saw during training.


VECTOR DATABASES AS LONG-TERM MEMORY FOR CHATBOTS

While AI models are trained on billions of data points, they don’t retain or
remember information for long periods of time. In other words, they don’t have
long-term memory. You can feed the model contextual clues to generate more
relevant information, but there is a limit to how much context a model can
support.

With a vector database like Pinecone there are no context limits. Vector
databases provide chatbot models with a data store or knowledgebase for context
to be retained for longer periods of time and in memory efficient ways. Chatbot
applications can retrieve contextually relevant and up-to-date embeddings from
memory instead of from the model itself. This not only ensures more consistently
right answers, especially for niche or proprietary topics, but it also enables
chatbot models to respond faster to queries by replacing the computational
overhead needed to retrain or update the model.

Chatbots with memory diagram
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/f6f74fdf7bdbe9221fd93f079d1637113d1f5619-1200x442.png]



BUILDING CHATBOTS WITH PINECONE

Pinecone is a fully-managed, vector database solution built for
production-ready, AI applications. As an external knowledge base, Pinecone
provides the long-term memory for chatbot applications to leverage context from
memory and ensure grounded, up to date responses.

Benefits of building with Pinecone

 * Ease of use: Get started in no time with our free plan, and access Pinecone
   through the console, an easy-to-use REST API, or one of our clients (Python,
   Node, Java, Go). Jumpstart your project by referencing our extensive
   documentation, example notebooks and applications, and many integrations.
 * Better results: With long-term memory, chatbot models can retrieve relevant
   contexts from Pinecone to enhance the prompts and generate an answer backed
   by real data sources. For hybrid search use cases, leverage our sparse-dense
   index support (using any LLM or sparse model) for the best results.
 * Highly scalable: Pinecone supports billions of vector embeddings so you can
   store and retain the context you need without hitting context limits. And
   with live index updates, your dataset is always up-to-date and available in
   real-time.
 * Ultra-low query latencies: Providing a smaller amount of much more relevant
   context lets you minimize end-to-end chatbot latency and consumption. Further
   minimize network latency by choosing the cloud and region that works best
   (learn more on our ).
 * Multi-modal support: Build applications that can process and respond with
   text, images, audio, and other modalities. Supporting multiple modalities
   creates a richer dataset and more ways for customers to interact with your
   application.


HOW IT WORKS

BASIC IMPLEMENTATION:

With a basic implementation, the workflow is tied directly to Pinecone to
consistently ensure correct, grounded responses. To get started:

 * Step 1: Take data from the data warehouse and generate vector embeddings
   using an AI model (e.g. or ).
 * Step 2: those embeddings in Pinecone.
 * Step 3: From your application, embed queries using the same AI model to
   create a “query vector”.
 * Step 4: through Pinecone using the embedded query, and receive ranked results
   based on similarity or relevance to the query.
 * Step 5: Attach the text of the retrieved results to the original query as
   contexts, and send both as a prompt to a generative AI model for grounded,
   relevant responses.

AGENT PLUS TOOLS IMPLEMENTATION:

Another way to get started is by implementing Pinecone as an agent. The below is
an example workflow using OpenAI’s with Pinecone:

 * Step 1: Fork from OpenAI.
 * Step 2: Set the environmental variables as per .
 * Step 3: Embed your documents using the retrieval plugin’s “/UPSERT” endpoint.
 * Step 4: Host the retrieval plugin on a cloud computing service like Digital
   Ocean.
 * Step 5: Install the plugin via ChatGPT using “Develop your own plugin”.
 * Step 6: Ask ChatGPT questions about the information indexed in your new
   plugin. Check out our and for an in-depth walkthrough on the ChatGPT
   retrieval plugin.


GET STARTED TODAY

today, and access our platform with an easy to use REST API or one of our many
clients. for more information.

Share via:


FURTHER READING


Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F019f2985c40a0ed2cfca739bc92996133cb07a6c-200x200.jpg&w=3840&q=100]

Senior Product Marketing Manager

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section
 * 
 * 
 * 

Share via:


Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.



DON'T MISS THE NEXT ONE...



Get an email the next time we publish an article about machine learning and
similarity search.

Get Updates