Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


v1v2

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Guides

v1

Ctrl+K
Troubleshooting
All
Guides
Reference
Pages

START TYPING TO SEARCH…


GETTING STARTED

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


ORGANIZATIONS

 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 


PROJECTS

 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * 


INDEXES

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


DATA

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 


OPERATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


INTEGRATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


REFERENCE

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


SUPPORT

 * 
 * 
 * 


TROUBLESHOOTING



This section describes common issues and how to solve them. Need help? Standard,
Enterprise, and Dedicated customers can also for help.


UNABLE TO PIP INSTALL

Version 3 of Python uses pip3. Use the following commands at the command line
(the terminal):

pip3 install -U pinecone-client



SLOW UPLOADS OR HIGH LATENCIES

To minimize latency when accessing Pinecone:

 * Switch to a cloud environment. For example: EC2, GCE, , , or . If you
   experience slow uploads or high query latencies, it might be because you are
   accessing Pinecone from your home network.
 * Consider deploying your application in the same environment as your Pinecone
   service. For users on the Starter (free) plan, the environment is GCP US-West
   (Oregon).
 * See for more tips.


HIGH QUERY LATENCIES WITH BATCHING

If you're batching queries, try reducing the number of queries per call to 1
query vector. You can make these calls in parallel and expect roughly the same
performance as with batching.


UPSERT THROTTLING WHEN USING THE GRPC CLIENT

It's possible to get write-throttled sooner when upserting using the gRPC index.
If you see this often, then we recommend using a backoff algorithm while
upserting.


PODS ARE FULL

There is a limit to how much vector data a single pod can hold. Create an index
with more pods to hold more data. and to increase capacity.

If your metadata has high cardinality, such as having a unique value for every
vector in a large index, the index will take up more memory than estimated. This
could result in the pods being full sooner than you expected. Consider , and
storing the rest in a separate key-value store.

See the for information on how to specify the number of pods for your index.


SECURITY CONCERNS

We work hard to earn and maintain trust by treating security and reliability as
a cornerstone of our company and product. Pinecone is SOC 2 Type II compliant
and GDPR-ready. See the for more information. to report any security concerns.


CORS ERRORS

When sending requests to Pinecone, you may receive the following error:

console
No 'Access-Control-Allow-Origin' header is present on the requested resource.


This error occurs in response to cross-origin requests. Most commonly, it occurs
when a user is running a local web server with the hostname 'localhost', which
Pinecone's Same Origin Policy (SOP) treats as distinct from the IP address of
the local machine.

To resolve this issue, host your web server on an external server with a public
IP address and DNS name entry.

Updated about 2 months ago

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Did this page help you?
Yes
No
 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 







Pinecone [https://pinecone.io/images/pinecone-white.svg]
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA | | | | | |

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.


