Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


v1v2

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Guides

v1

Ctrl+K
Understanding projects
All
Guides
Reference
Pages

START TYPING TO SEARCH…


GETTING STARTED

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


ORGANIZATIONS

 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 


PROJECTS

 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * 


INDEXES

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


DATA

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 


OPERATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


INTEGRATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


REFERENCE

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


SUPPORT

 * 
 * 
 * 


UNDERSTANDING PROJECTS



OVERVIEW

This document explains the concepts related to Pinecone projects.


PROJECTS CONTAIN INDEXES AND USERS

Each Pinecone project contains a number of and users. Only a user who belongs to
the project can access the indexes in that project. Each project also has at
least one project owner. All of the pods in a single project are located in a
single environment.


PROJECT SETTINGS

When you create a new project, you can choose the name, deployment environment,
and pod limit.


PROJECT ENVIRONMENT

When creating a project, you must choose a cloud environment for the indexes in
that project. Your project environment can affect your . The following table
lists the available cloud regions, the corresponding values of the environment
parameter for the , and which billing tier has access to each environment:

CloudRegionEnvironmentTier AvailabilityGCPus-central-1
(Iowa)gcp-starterStarterGCPus-west-1 (N.
California)us-west1-gcp-freeStarterGCPasia-southeast-1
(Singapore)asia-southeast1-gcp-freeStarterGCPus-west-4 (Las
Vegas)us-west4-gcp-freeStarterGCPus-west-1 (N. California)us-west1-gcpStandard /
EnterpriseGCPus-central-1 (Iowa)us-central1-gcpStandard / EnterpriseGCPus-west-4
(Las Vegas)us-west4-gcpStandard / EnterpriseGCPus-east-4
(Virginia)us-east4-gcpStandard /
EnterpriseGCPnorthamerica-northeast-1northamerica-northeast1-gcpStandard /
EnterpriseGCPasia-northeast-1 (Japan)asia-northeast1-gcpStandard /
EnterpriseGCPasia-southeast-1 (Singapore)asia-southeast1-gcpStandard /
EnterpriseGCPus-east-1 (South Carolina)us-east1-gcpStandard /
EnterpriseGCPeu-west-1 (Belgium)eu-west1-gcpStandard / EnterpriseGCPeu-west-4
(Netherlands)eu-west4-gcpStandard / EnterpriseAWSus-east-1
(Virginia)us-east-1-awsStandard / EnterpriseAzureeastus
(Virginia)eastus-azureStandard / Enterprise

* This environment has unique features and limitations. See for more
information.

if you need a dedicated deployment in other regions.

The environment cannot be changed after the project is created.


PROJECT POD LIMIT

You can set the maximum number of pods that can be used in total across all
indexes in a project. Use this to control costs.

The pod limit can be changed only by the project owner.


PROJECT ROLES

There are two project roles: Project owner and project member. Table 1 below
summarizes the permissions for each role.

Table 1: Project roles and permissions

Project rolePermissions in organizationProject ownerManage project membersManage
project API keysManage pod limitsProject memberAccess API keysCreate indexes in
projectUse indexes in project


API KEYS

Each Pinecone has one or more API keys. In order to , a user must provide a
valid API key for the relevant Pinecone project.

To view the API key for your project, open the , select the project, and click
API Keys.


PROJECT ID

Each Pinecone project has a project ID. This hexadecimal string appears as part
of the URL for API calls.

To find a project's ID, follow these steps:

 1. Go to the .

 2. In the upper-left corner, select your project.

 3. Click Indexes.

 4. Under the name of your indexes, find the index URL. For example:
    
    example-index-1e3g52e.svc.us-east1-gcp.pinecone.io

The portion of the index URL after the index name and before the dot is the
project ID.

For example, in the index URL test-index-3e2f43f.svc.us-east1-gcp.pinecone.io,
the project ID is 3e2f43f.

Updated about 2 months ago

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Did this page help you?
Yes
No
 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * * 
     * 
     * 
   * 
   * 







Pinecone [https://pinecone.io/images/pinecone-white.svg]
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA | | | | | |

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.


