Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



INTRODUCTION TO AIRBYTE AND THE PINECONE CONNECTOR

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Pinecone connector for is all about leveraging the extensive range of
Airbyte's source connectors and bringing them together with Pinecone's
capabilities. It's about creating a seamless flow of data, with the ability to
embed and upsert information, all in a way that's tailored to your specific use
cases.

This post aims to provide a clear and practical overview of the Pinecone Airbyte
connector. From enhancing semantic search capabilities to building intelligent
recommendation systems, the Pinecone Airbyte connector offers a versatile
solution. By tapping into Airbyte's extensive array of source connectors, you
can explore new ways to enrich your data-driven projects and achieve your
specific goals.

So let's dive in and explore what makes this connector a valuable addition to
your data integration toolbox, without the complexity or constraints of a
one-size-fits-all solution.


FEATURES AND TECHNICAL DETAILS

The Pinecone connector is easy to use, yet very powerful. Here's what you need
to know:


INTEGRATION WITH AIRBYTE

 * Source Connectors: Airbyte's extensive selection of hundreds of source
   connectors is at the heart of this integration. The Pinecone Airbyte
   connector enables you to tap into various data sources, creating a seamless
   flow of information into Pinecone's vector database.
 * Configuration Simplicity: Setting up the connector requires only some basic
   configuration details, such as the Pinecone API key and the specifications of
   your source system. No need for complex integration steps or on-premises
   deployment.
 * Column Embedding and Metadata Upsert: You can specify which column to use for
   embedding and define the chunk size and metadata fields. The connector will
   then embed the indicated column for each row and upsert the embeddings along
   with the metadata as defined.
 * Incremental sync: Airbyte supports syncing data incrementally, which means
   only new data will be processed - instead of reprocessing the entire dataset
   whenever any change is made in the connection source. When enabled,
   incremental sync will ensure only new data is embedded and upserted which
   could greatly optimize cost.



Airbyte diagram
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/d7240f4d4a20c599e4a960fbe98287cf6e003fbb-762x628.png]





FLEXIBILITY AND ADAPTABILITY

 * Free and Open Source: The connector is available to everyone, offering a free
   and open-source solution to handle specific data integration needs.
 * Extensible: Designed with adaptability in mind, the Pinecone Airbyte
   connector will allow users to utilize other embedding models hosted elsewhere
   in the future.


USE CASES

Here are some of the use cases and industry applications for the Pinecone
Airbyte connector, categorized by specific source connectors. This is by no
means an extensive list, but it will give us a good idea of how these systems
could be used in conjunction with Pinecone.

Source Connector Use Cases PostgreSQL Data analytics; Real-time reporting.
BigQuery Large-scale data analysis; Machine learning integration. Salesforce
Customer relationship management; Lead scoring. HubSpot Marketing automation;
Customer segmentation. Shopify Personalized product recommendations;

This table showcases the wide range of applications that the Pinecone Airbyte
connector can enable by leveraging different source connectors. It illustrates
how you can address unique challenges and opportunities across various
industries, making the most of Airbyte's rich selection of source connectors. In
this upcoming series, we will explore these use-cases in greater depth.


WHAT DOES THE CONNECTOR DO?

The connector iterates over the rows in the source connection, embeds one
selected column and optionally adds metadata based on a subset of selected
columns. The embedding is done using one of the following methods:

 1. OpenAI - using the OpenAI API, the connector will produce embeddings using
    the text-embedding-ada-002 model.
 2. Cohere - using the Cohere API, the connector will produce embeddings using
    the embed-english-light-v2.0 model.

Once a connection is created, the connector will pull data from the configured
source and then pass it to the Pinecone destination, which includes the
embedding process and synchronizing the data with the configured Pinecone index.


HOW DO I USE THE CONNECTOR?

To use the connector, we’ll create a new connection between a simple source and
the Pinecone destination.


CONFIGURE A SOURCE CONNECTOR

For the purpose of this example, we’ll use a as the source data for our
connection.

configure-source
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/a8faa0a68f5b814cab4c0d4764b09a2112f1c0b2-2000x1864.png]



CONFIGURE A NEW “PINECONE” DESTINATION

From the list of connectors, select “Pinecone”. You’ll then see a configuration
screen. The configuration for the connector has three sections:

 1. Processing: handles how the records will be processed, which fields of the
    records will be embedded and which will be used as metadata.
 2. Pinecone configuration: this is where you’ll provide the connector with
    configuration information for your Pinecone index.
 3. Embedding: this is where you’ll provide the connector with the API key for
    your embedding provider.

PROCESSING

processing
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/4c6e1646fd154ce0b8f902f8a3ba26df63294992-2000x586.png]

 1. Chunk size: If the intended content you want to embed is long, you may
    choose a specific chunk size. The connector will split the selected text
    field into chunks in the specified size and then embed and upsert each
    chunk. Each chunk will include the metadata field _ab_record_id which
    references the original record from which the chunk was created.
 2. Metadata fields: for each embedding you create, you can associate some or
    all of the columns as metadata. Please note that there is a 40kb size limit
    to the metadata stored.
 3. Text fields to embed: you can choose one or more fields to use as the source
    for the embeddings. If more than one field is selected, the text from each
    will be combined before embedding.

PINECONE CONFIGURATION

pinecone-configuration
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/68513bd871216bde259d0a73c6f1a03b96cf4a73-2000x449.png]

 1. Index: the name of the index you’ll use. You’ll need to create the index
    either in the or prior to setting up the connector.
 2. Pinecone environment: the environment for your Pinecone project. This may be
    found in the .
 3. Pinecone API key: you can retrieve the API key from the .

EMBEDDING

As mentioned above, you’ll be able to choose between OpenAI and Cohere as your
providers. You’ll have to provide the API key for your embedding provider.

embedding
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/aa55451fa46c4487b1feb4f0b35e72a163d895d7-2000x383.png]


TESTING

Once you created the destination, you’ll click “Test and save” to make sure
everything is configured properly and all the connections are working.


CREATE A NEW CONNECTION

Once we set up our source and destination, we’ll set up a new connection.
Assuming this is our first connection, we’ll see this dialog:

new-connection
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/1e052b475817e016613b07ec22e008b3c5ca5dee-2000x1704.png]


We’ll start by selecting the source:

define-source
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/5ff9264212e1a2e9bf644019d932b6a18e5fda90-2000x518.png]


Then select Pinecone as the destination:

define-destination
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/eef0df73d1205f1a78182b2963a5dcc734839c25-2000x632.png]


Next, we’ll set up the connection configuration. For the purposes of this
example, we’ll set the replication frequency to “Manual”.

connection-manual
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/ef3107f92a29393d75cfb0ade281760dd39110ba-2000x1313.png]


Once the connection is set up, we’ll hit “Sync now” to test our connector end to
end.

sync-now
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/a7524abf24ba0bf9bcf24689408a4adee800f0e2-2000x657.png]


Once the synchronization process has completed, we should see the following:

done
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/2f983141d38daad2ca672419a8ec45c1902c8597-2000x662.png]



SUMMARY

In this first look at the Pinecone connector for Airbyte, we reviewed some of
the possible use cases for the connector, and saw how to set up the connector
and how it works end to end. In the upcoming parts of this series, we’ll delve
deeper into more complex integrations, and discuss the various features of
Airbyte and how they interact with Pinecone.

Share via:


Syncing data from a variety of sources to Pinecone is made easy with Airbyte
(series cover image)
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F69d2159caee9450ad91a5efe2c39c8b15260ed2b-1700x2192.png&w=3840&q=100]

Chapters

 1.  * 
     * 
     * 
     * 
     * 

 2. 


Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.



DON'T MISS THE NEXT ONE...



Get an email the next time we publish an article about machine learning and
similarity search.

Get Updates