Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING FOR SEMANTIC SEARCH

By James Briggs

Learn how to make machines understand language as people do. This free course
covers everything you need to build state-of-the-art language models, from
machine translation to question-answering, and more.

Share via:


[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F5d5b6937ce94652fbd12baba1dc99bf180cfe589-850x1096.png&w=750&q=75]


INTRODUCTION

Semantic search has long been a critical component in the technology stacks of
giants such as Google, Amazon, and Netflix. The recent democratization of these
technologies has ignited a search renaissance, and these once guarded
technologies are being discovered and quickly adopted by organizations across
every imaginable industry.

Why the explosion of interest in semantic search? It unlocks an essential recipe
to many products and applications, the scope of which is unknown but already
broad. Search engines, autocorrect, translation, recommendation engines, error
logging, and much more are already heavy users of semantic search. Many tools
that can benefit from a meaningful language search or clustering function are
supercharged by semantic search.

Two pillars support semantic search; vector search and NLP. In this course, we
focus on the pillar of NLP and how it brings ‘semantic’ to semantic search. We
introduce concepts and theory throughout the course before backing them up with
real, industry-standard code and libraries.

You will learn what dense vectors are and why they’re fundamental to NLP and
semantic search. We cover how to build state-of-the-art language models covering
semantic similarity, multilingual embeddings, unsupervised training, and more.
Learn how to apply these in the real world, where we often lack suitable
datasets or masses of computing power.

In short, you will learn everything you need to know to begin applying NLP in
your semantic search use-cases.

Let’s begin!


BONUS MATERIALS: PROJECTS






BONUS MATERIALS: QUESTION-ANSWERING






FURTHER RESOURCES





New chapters coming soon!

Get email updates when they're published:

Get Updates

Chapter 14


TRAINING SENTENCE TRANSFORMERS

The most popular methods for training sentence transformers, and tips for each.

Chapter 15


AND MORE...


Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.



DON'T MISS THE NEXT ONE...



Get an email the next time we publish an article about machine learning and
similarity search.

Get Updates