Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



SEMANTIC SEARCH WITH PINECONE

Jun 30, 2023

Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F019f2985c40a0ed2cfca739bc92996133cb07a6c-200x200.jpg&w=3840&q=100]

Senior Product Marketing Manager

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


MAKE YOUR SEARCH APP GET IT.

We expect the search applications we interact with to provide us with relevant
information and answer the questions we have. We expect this process to be fast,
easy, and accurate. In fact, 71% of consumers expect personalized results, and
76% get frustrated when they don’t find it.

When searching with a keyword-based solution, applications will look for exact
word or string matches. If your users aren’t sure what exactly to search for,
searching by keywords won’t always get them the right answer. It can also be
time-consuming for them to find the information they need, especially when
there’s a large amount of unstructured data to search through. As a result, they
won’t find the answers they’re looking for or they’ll get incomplete answers.


TURNING TO AI FOR BETTER SEARCH RESULTS AND USER EXPERIENCE

Unlike keyword-based search, semantic search uses the meaning of the search
query. It finds relevant results even if they don’t exactly match the query.
This works by combining the power of Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate
with the long-term memory of a vector database.

Once the embeddings are stored inside a vector database like Pinecone, they can
be searched by semantic similarity to power applications for a variety of use
cases.

Semantic search diagram
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/085677bde72a58d1f559dc30353e9e98fa593cb2-1100x526.png]



SEMANTIC SEARCH USE CASES

 * Knowledge management: Save time and boost productivity for your internal
   teams by enabling them to self-serve and search through various internal data
   and documents to answer their questions. With semantic search, they can more
   quickly find what they are looking for. For example, a leading telecom
   company uses Pinecone to enable their customer service teams to search
   through their internal knowledge base to respond to customer inquiries
   quicker and with more accuracy.
 * End-user applications: Gain a competitive advantage by building and providing
   a solution to increase relevance of search results for end-users. With
   semantic search, users will be able to increase productivity by finding
   answers to their questions faster. For example, a global ERP software company
   uses Pinecone to let their customers get insights from employee feedback
   using semantic search.
 * Aggregated data services: Enable your end-users to make more informed,
   data-driven decisions by compiling various data sources and identifying
   valuable insights using semantic search. For example, an online-learning
   company uses Pinecone to power their core search and question-answering
   feature for millions of users.


CHALLENGES WHEN BUILDING AI-POWERED SEARCH

Companies are increasingly turning to AI to power their search applications, but
self-managing the complex infrastructure — from the vector database to the LLMs
needed to generate embeddings — can lead to challenges.

Without the necessary infrastructure or dedicated ML engineering and data
science teams, companies self-hosting vector databases to power semantic search
applications can face:

 * High query latencies: Storing and searching through large numbers of
   embeddings on traditional databases is prohibitively slow or expensive.
 * Less relevant results: Answers can be improved by fine-tuning the LLM, but
   that requires data science expertise and ML engineering. Search results may
   be less accurate without the necessary AI and ML resources.
 * Capacity and freshness tradeoffs: While it’s important for a search solution
   to provide the most up to date information, running frequent batch jobs to
   maintain a fresh index leads to high compute and storage costs.


SEARCH LIKE YOU MEAN IT WITH PINECONE

Providing fast, fresh, and filtered results, Pinecone customers don’t need to
make tradeoffs between performance, scale, and query speed. Pinecone is a
fully-managed vector database trusted by some of the world’s largest
enterprises. We provide the necessary infrastructure to support your semantic
search use cases reliably at scale.


BENEFITS OF SEMANTIC SEARCH WITH PINECONE

 * Ultra-low query latencies: Power search across billions of documents in
   milliseconds, combined with usage-based pricing for high-volume production
   applications. Partition indexes into namespaces to further reduce search
   scope and query latency.
 * Better search results: With Pinecone, you can trust that you are searching
   the most up-to-date information with live index updates. Combine semantic
   search with metadata filters to increase relevance, and for hybrid search use
   cases, leverage our sparse-dense index support (using any LLM or sparse
   model) for the best results.
 * Easy to use: Get started in no time with our free plan, and access Pinecone
   through the console, an easy-to-use REST API or one of our clients (Python,
   Node, Java, Go). Jumpstart your project by referencing our extensive
   documentation, example notebooks and applications, and many integrations.
 * Fully-managed: Launch, use, and scale your search solution without needing to
   maintain infrastructure, monitor services, or troubleshoot algorithms.
   Pinecone supports both GCP and AWS — choose the provider and region that
   works best for you.


INCORPORATING PINECONE INTO YOUR SEARCH STACK:

Adding semantic search to your search stack is easy with Pinecone. To get
started, you need Pinecone plus the following components: data warehouse (or any
source of truth for data), AI model, and your application. You can also refer to
our and guide for more information.

Step 1: Take data from the data warehouse and generate vector embeddings using
an AI model (e.g. or ).

Step 2: those embeddings in Pinecone.

Step 3: From your application, embed queries using the same AI model to create a
“query vector.”

Step 4: through Pinecone using the query embedding, and receive ranked results
based on semantic similarity.


COMPLETE YOUR SEARCH STACK WITH OUR INTEGRATIONS:

Pinecone works with embeddings from any AI model or LLM. We recommend getting
started with either or . We also have integrations for LLM frameworks (e.g. )
and data infrastructure (e.g. ) to take your search applications to the next
level.


GET STARTED TODAY

Ready to start building with Pinecone? today to get started or to talk to an
expert.

REFERENCES

 1.  

Share via:


FURTHER READING


Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F019f2985c40a0ed2cfca739bc92996133cb07a6c-200x200.jpg&w=3840&q=100]

Senior Product Marketing Manager

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section
 * 
 * 

Share via:


Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.



DON'T MISS THE NEXT ONE...



Get an email the next time we publish an article about machine learning and
similarity search.

Get Updates