Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


v1v2

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Guides

v1

Ctrl+K
Managing cost
All
Guides
Reference
Pages

START TYPING TO SEARCH…


GETTING STARTED

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


ORGANIZATIONS

 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 


PROJECTS

 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
 * 


INDEXES

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


DATA

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 


OPERATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


INTEGRATIONS

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


REFERENCE

 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 


SUPPORT

 * 
 * 
 * 


MANAGING COST



OVERVIEW

This topic provides guidance on managing the cost of Pinecone. For the latest
pricing details, see our . For help estimating total cost, see . To see a
calculation of your current usage and costs, see the in the Pinecone console.

The derives from , the number of pods in use, pod size, the total time each pod
is running, and the billing plan. This topic describes several ways you can
manage your overall Pinecone cost by adjusting these variables.


USE THE STARTER PLAN FOR SMALL PROJECTS OR PROTOTYPES

The incurs no costs, and supports 100,000 vectors. If this meets the needs of
your project, you can use Pinecone for free; if you decide to or , you can
upgrade your billing plan later.


CHOOSE THE RIGHT POD SIZE FOR YOUR APPLICATION

Different Pinecone pod sizes are designed for different applications, and some
are more expensive than others. By , you can pay for the resources you need. For
example, the s1 pod type provides large storage capacity and lower overall costs
with slightly higher query latencies than p1 pods. By switching to a different
pod type, you may be able to reduce costs while still getting the performance
your application needs.


BACK UP INACTIVE INDEXES

When a specific index is not in use, and delete the inactive index. When you're
ready to use these vectors again, you can . This new index can also use a
different index type or size. Because it's relatively cheap to store
collections, you can reduce costs by only running an index when it's in use.


USE NAMESPACES FOR MULTITENANCY

If your application requires you to separate users into groups, consider .
Depending on your application requirements, this may allow you to reduce the
total number of active indexes.


COMMIT TO ANNUAL SPEND

Users who commit to an annual contract may qualify for discounted rates. To
learn more, .


TALK TO SUPPORT

Users on the Standard and Enterprise plans can for help in optimizing costs.


NEXT STEPS

 * Learn about
 * Learn about

Updated 16 days ago

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Did this page help you?
Yes
No
 * 
 * * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 
   * 







Pinecone [https://pinecone.io/images/pinecone-white.svg]
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA | | | | | |

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.


