Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


v1v2

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Examples

v2

Ctrl+K
All
Guides
Reference
Pages

START TYPING TO SEARCH…


EXAMPLES


PINECONE EXAMPLES

Get hands-on with Pinecone and common AI patterns, tools, and algorithms. For
additional examples, see .

Example Model(s) Stack How to perform a simple semantic
search.all-MiniLM-L6-v2PythonSentence Transformers A simple semantic search app
in TypeScriptall-MiniLM-L6-v2TypeScriptSentence Transformers Use the official
AWS Reference Architecture as a starting point for high-scale semantic search
apps.all-MiniLM-L6-v2TypeScriptTransformers.jsAWSPulumiReact Build retrieval
enhanced generative QA systems with
OpenAI.text-davinci-003text-embedding-ada-002PythonOpenAI Use Pinecone to create
a simple personalized article or content recommender in
Typescript.all-MiniLM-L6-v2TypeScriptTransformers.jsDanfo.js How to create
conversational agents with LangChain and
Pinecone.gpt-3.5-turbotext-embedding-ada-002PythonOpenAILangChain How to create
conversational agents with LangChain and
Pinecone.gpt-3.5-turboall-MiniLM-L6-v2TypeScriptOpenAILangChainTransformers.jsDanfo.js
How to give knowledge base information to an LLM using
LangChain.gpt-3.5-turbotext-embedding-ada-002LangchainOpenAIPython How to use
GPT-4 with retrieval augmentation to answer
questions.gpt-4text-embedding-ada-002LangchainOpenAIPython Use Pinecone to
create an image search engine with
Typescript.clip-vit-base-patch32TypeScriptTransformers.jsReact








Pinecone [https://pinecone.io/images/pinecone-white.svg]
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA | | | | | |

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.


