Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



PINECONE RECOGNIZED AS THE MOST POPULAR VECTOR DATABASE

Nov 21, 2023 - in Company
Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F6d0c22de734e65c089fcee0d2e924af2e8e4301e-484x444.png&w=3840&q=100]

Senior Product Marketing Manager

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2023 welcomed AI with unprecedented enthusiasm, revealing new trends, solutions,
and use cases. In fact, have increased their investment in AI and now have a
solution in pilot or in production since the start of the year. Reports by , ,
and all offer insights on the state of AI in 2023. Each report represents a
different sample size, but there are some key themes across the reports that
we’re most excited about.


PINECONE IS THE DEVELOPER FAVORITE

The first common thread across the reports is that developers love Pinecone.
have been the databases in popularity over the past 12 months. In such a dynamic
and complex space, we’re thrilled to be recognized as the most popular and most
used vector database across all reports.

 * Retool’s survey of over 1,500 tech people in various industries named
   Pinecone the most popular vector database.
 * Streamlit’s report indicated that Pinecone has been the most-used vector
   database. With more than 300 weekly app counts in October on their platform,
   Pinecone was 1.6X more popular than the next most popular solution.

Pinecone is the most used vector database
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/f3a49dc81b015459834d24d9a968fb68098834f5-617x510.jpg]
Pinecone is the most used vector database
Source:
 * Surveying 450 enterprise executives across the U.S. and Europe, Menlo
   Ventures included Pinecone as the only vector database on their GenAI stack
   diagram. The fastest way to bring GenAI applications to market is with a
   vector database that’s easy for developers to use and operate, with a
   thriving developer community. (For transparency, Menlo Ventures is an
   investor in Pinecone.)

Pinecone is the only vector database in Menlo Ventures Gen AI stack
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/6efbd0b38dcf2b06aab92f13bdb6979898cad55f-1364x713.jpg]
Pinecone is the only vector database in Menlo Ventures Gen AI stack
Source:

Pinecone continues to receive recognition outside of these reports. Pinecone is
the only vector database on the inaugural We are ranked as the top purpose-built
vector database solution in , and rated as the best vector database on .

We designed Pinecone with three tenets to guarantee it meets and exceeds
expectations for all types of real-world AI workloads:

 * Ease of use and operations. Pinecone had to be a fully managed vector
   database that doesn’t require developers to manage infrastructure or tune
   vector-search algorithms. Developers can get started in a few clicks, and no
   machine learning expertise is needed.
 * Performance and cost-efficiency at any scale. Pinecone had to meet and exceed
   production performance criteria, including low latencies, high recall, and
   O(sec) data freshness at a low and predictable cost, regardless of scale.
 * Flexible. Pinecone had to support workloads of various performance and scale
   requirements.

The unanimous recognition is a powerful validation of our product principles. We
are more motivated than ever to continue improving our product and delivering
the best experience possible for all our customers.


RETRIEVAL AUGMENTED GENERATION (RAG) IS BECOMING THE STANDARD IN CUSTOMIZATION

Across the reports, generative Q&A is among the most popular applications.
Streamlit’s report revealed that chatbots are the leading app category, and
Retool’s survey echoes this sentiment, with chatbots and knowledgebase Q&A as
the highest use cases internally and externally. Respondents told Retool their
top concerns for those applications include model output accuracy and
hallucinations.

When developing chatbots for specific purposes, there’s a need for customization
with domain-specific data for more reliable results. For example, an internal
legal Q&A assistant at a law firm needs to access all the public legal
literature, and internal legal documents to generate more relevant and accurate
answers.

Vector-based , an AI framework augmenting LLMs with up-to-date external
knowledge to improve response accuracy, is becoming the standard approach. 31%
of AI adopters surveyed by Menlo Ventures use RAG to supply more accurate
answers. Menlo Ventures also predicted that “powerful context-aware, data-rich
workflows will be the key to unlocking enterprise generative AI adoption.” Those
workflows, powered by RAG with vector databases, will provide companies a
competitive advantage over the programmatic logic employed by many incumbents.

RAG is the 2nd most popular customization approach
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/9cd4065268b9b9b9918a34c5e0693611a5af8cbd-1333x646.jpg]
RAG is the 2nd most popular customization approach
Source:

To help developers quickly and easily build GenAI applications with RAG,
Pinecone launched . Canopy takes on the heavy lifting such as chunking and
embedding your text data to chat history management, query optimization, context
retrieval (including ), and augmented generation, so you can focus on building
and experimenting with RAG.


PURPOSE-BUILT VECTOR DATABASES ARE CORE TO THE AI STACK

While the modern AI stack is still in flux, it’s clear that building with a
vector database like Pinecone will continue to transform industries. If you want
an AI-powered search that’s fast, accurate, cost-effective, and scalable, a
purpose-built database for vector data is necessary.

That’s why Pinecone built everything from scratch rather than piecing together a
legacy architecture and a popular algorithm for a convenient bolt-on vector
search. For example, our proprietary is built to be more memory efficient and
achieve O(sec) data freshness, high availability, and low latency for
production-level dynamic data.

. As gen AI use cases grow to billions of vectors, you need purpose-built vector
databases that are highly cost-efficient at scale while still maintaining ease
of use, high availability, performance, and accuracy.

A year ago, vector databases were still a new term to most people. All three
recent reports highlighted the vector databases category, emphasizing their
importance in the modern AI stack. The Streamlit report demonstrated that vector
retrieval, the specialty of vector databases like Pinecone, is part of the
fundamental LLM app architecture. Vector databases empower rapid and efficient
searching within unstructured datasets, including text, images, video, or audio.

Vector retrieval is a key part in LLM app architecture
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/4a3d0ff1dacc22adb67f05f0a9b28a3586166714-1574x659.jpg]
Vector retrieval is a key part in LLM app architecture
Source:


THIS IS JUST THE BEGINNING

Despite all the excitement about AI, we’re still in the early days of adoption.

The Retool survey shows that although a majority (77.1%) responded that their
companies had made some effort to adopt AI, around half (48.9%) said those
efforts were fledgling – just getting started or ad-hoc use cases.

Menlo Ventures suggested that even though incumbents currently dominate the
market, there are opportunities for startups to pioneer and drive innovation in
the upcoming chapter of computing history. Advanced techniques, such as agents
and chain-of-thought reasoning, are set to propel the next generation of
generative AI-native players. These innovators are poised to reshape enterprise
workflows and establish novel markets from scratch.

To stay ahead of the AI competition, the most popular vector database, or , and
learn how we can help you build revenue-driving GenAI applications.




Share via:


FURTHER READING


Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F6d0c22de734e65c089fcee0d2e924af2e8e4301e-484x444.png&w=3840&q=100]

Senior Product Marketing Manager

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

Share via:


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


WHAT WILL YOU BUILD?

Upgrade your search or chatbots applications with just a few lines of code.



Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.

