Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



MAKING IT EASIER TO MAINTAIN OPEN-SOURCE PROJECTS WITH CODIUMAI AND PINECONE

Sep 27, 2023

Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F8f66c8410d14247e66c68467afa7870768ed147b-460x460.png&w=3840&q=100]

Staff Developer Advocate

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The maintenance burden for open-source developers extends beyond technical tasks
like code reviews, bug fixing, and feature implementation. Especially for
popular projects, much of the work comes down to triaging and responding to a
deluge of issues, questions, and discussions.

Unfortunately, folks new to a project often open a new issue without first
searching to see if a similar issue exists, increasing the workload of
maintainers, who must find and link related issues when responding.

In this post, we’ll examine how works, how it uses semantic search to
automatically find and link issues related to new issues opened by community
members, and how the vector database and its powers this use case.


AUTOMATICALLY SURFACING SIMILAR GITHUB ISSUES

Let’s suppose an enthusiastic new community member visits your GitHub project
and files this issue without first checking if there are any similar issues
already open:



GitHub new issue opened
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/0dfff4cf75f101cf332cf2d55ebc9f053aee3b4a-1155x949.png]


PR-agent will find similar issues that have already been opened, with a high
degree of accuracy, and automatically comment, linking to the pre-existing
issues:



CodiumAI similar issues solution comment
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/8ea5aa5c9e54d3e2925eacbac6ac37fdc07b8dd9-953x339.png]



This automates away a great deal of open-source maintainer toil, allowing human
developers to focus where they can have the most impact: creative
problem-solving and improving software projects.

Every user visiting a GitHub project connected to PR-agent can issue a
command to pull back the list of issues about the same bug or feature request.

This functionality is more complex than it may initially seem: naive
text-matching searches will not retrieve issues about the same topic or problem
with a high enough degree of accuracy to be useful. Let’s look under the hood at
how the solution works end to end.


HOW DOES IT WORK?

The CodiumAI / Pinecone integration uses semantic search, which examines the
intent behind the user’s words. We’ve written in-depth about (and ). It converts
the user’s ambiguous natural language query into vectors and then queries a
vector database, such as , to return matches closest to the user’s meaning.

Whereas naive keyword-matching search will get tripped up by the different
contexts in which the word “bank” can be used, as in:

 1. Bank of England: an institution that handles money
 2. Bank shot: a special kind of golf shot intentionally fired into a hill to
    slow the ball down
 3. The muddy bank: The edge of a river

Semantic search will return the correct results based on the intent and context
of the user’s query because it converts human language into vectors, which
vector databases can use to determine semantic similarity.


LEVERAGING GITHUB WEBHOOKS TO ACT ON ALL NEW ISSUES

CodiumAI’s engineering team built a custom solution that converts the initial
GitHub issue into vectors that can be stored in Pinecone.

GitHub offers webhooks support, allowing notifications to be delivered to
external web servers when certain events occur on GitHub. For example, you can
configure a GitHub webhook that calls your server whenever a new issue is opened
against one of your repositories.

This chart demonstrates the flow end to end:

CodiumAI Pinecone integration flowchart
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/fa696cc5530194c94ff0b8ed60f31d1e6aee9f75-614x823.png]


When a new issue is opened, Pinecone’s vector database can be queried to find
the “nearest neighbors” to the new issue, meaning the issues most similar in
their actual content and meaning.


ACHIEVING THE BEST ACCURACY THROUGH EXPERIMENTATION

CodiumAI’s solution uses OpenAI’s text-embedding-ada-02 embedding model to
convert the GitHub issue title and body into vectors. In the initial stages of
building out this solution, the CodiumAI team considered flattening and
vectorizing subsequent follow-up comments on GitHub issues but ultimately found
the best accuracy was achieved by converting the GitHub issue title and body to
vectors and then querying Pinecone for nearest neighbors to retrieve issues
discussing the same problem or feature.


REDUCING TOIL ACROSS THE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT LIFECYCLE, SECURELY

Helping out open-source maintainers is essential. But CodiumAI has broader
ambitions to reduce developer toil across the entire development lifecycle by
auto-generating tests for your codebase, catching security issues within your
IDE before insecure code is committed, generating pull request descriptions, and
more. If you’re a developer who wishes they had some more free time, .


WHY PINECONE?

The CodiumAI team shared that they were able to go from idea to working
implementation in about 4 days using Pinecone’s API. They especially found
useful because it allowed them to manage and address multiple repositories via
metadata.

CodiumAI’s similar issue solution allows each GitHub user to supply their own
Pinecone API key when installing the application for even more privacy and
control over their data.

Even though GitHub issues are completely public, meaning that even folks not
signed into GitHub can find them in search engines and read them, the CodiumAI
team takes security seriously, which was part of why they chose Pinecone as
their vector database.

Pinecone is a cloud-native and fully managed solution designed for extreme scale
and security. When you use Pinecone, you provision indexes, upsert vectors, and
make queries via API calls, and all of your vectors are encrypted in flight and
at rest. Pinecone never looks at embeddings and only stores data necessary to
service your API requests.

Share via:


FURTHER READING


Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F8f66c8410d14247e66c68467afa7870768ed147b-460x460.png&w=3840&q=100]

Staff Developer Advocate

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

Share via:


Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.



DON'T MISS THE NEXT ONE...



Get an email the next time we publish an article about machine learning and
similarity search.

Get Updates