Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



HOW PINECONE AND ITS PARTNERS ARE TRANSFORMING GENAI WITH SERVERLESS

Jan 16, 2024 - in Product
Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F1489b1c54d81e6adb106fd5bb57c476bcf160df1-372x372.png&w=3840&q=100]

Partner Marketing

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the many things enterprises consider when developing commercially viable
GenAI applications, is to make as much proprietary data available on-demand to
the application as possible. The most efficient approach to enhancing the
quality of GenAI applications and minimizing hallucinations, while maintaining
complete control over the accessible data for GenAI models, is .

The next big in application quality comes from simply adding data but even with
a traditional vector database, the cost to maintain the data can be prohibitive.
When you look at legacy databases, they are not built to handle vector data at
large scales and regardless of the database, developers still need to set up,
provision, manage and maintain the infrastructure while being cognizant of
spend.

Picture this: Developers can now input nearly unlimited knowledge into GenAI
applications at up to 50x lower cost compared to legacy databases. This
completely re-invented vector database is truly a serverless experience without
the burden, manpower and expense required to provision, manage and maintain
clusters on the backend. Developers will experience a significantly more
efficient path to reliable, effective, and impactful GenAI applications
regardless of the company size or GenAI maturity.

Serverless Design Principles:

 * Separate read, write, and storage
 * Load the least amount of data required to save on memory
 * Focus on the cluster that matters the most.

Serverless Benefits:

 * “Unlimited” index capacity via cloud object storage (ex. S3, GCS)
 * Decreased cost to serve - only pay for what you use
 * Lower cost for high availability

Introducing Pinecone serverless is just part of the equation. Pinecone’s
objective is to provide a platform for developers that is the easiest to use.
The best way to deliver that is to integrate with other best-in-class GenAI
solutions. We’ve partnered with leaders like AWS, Anyscale, Cohere, Confluent,
Langchain, Pulumi and Vercel on integrations that empower users to capitalize on
the power of GenAI.

Learn more about Pinecone serverless integrations with these partners below:

When building RAG applications, embeddings are a critical component in powering
vector databases used for search and retrieval. Read how and Pinecone handle
data ingestion and embeddings computations at scale, while still allowing for
flexibility in the preprocessing step and embeddings model.

Pinecone serverless in combination with simplifies the process of working with
embeddings and is a powerful toolkit for deploying and scaling enterprise
semantic search and RAG applications.

’s Pinecone Sink Connector allows organizations to easily access high-value data
and harness the full potential of Confluent for any GenAI use case.

Pinecone is one of ’s most popular vector database integrations. See how
Pinecone serverless along with LangServe and LangSmith can address some of the
challenges associated in deploying RAG applications.

The Pinecone Provider for makes it easy for platform engineers and developers to
maintain, manage, and reproduce infrastructure as code for their AI applications

See how RAG chatbots use Pinecone serverless and to demonstrate a URL crawl,
data chunking and embedding, and semantic questioning.

Share via:


FURTHER READING


Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F1489b1c54d81e6adb106fd5bb57c476bcf160df1-372x372.png&w=3840&q=100]

Partner Marketing


Share via:


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


WHAT WILL YOU BUILD?

Upgrade your search or chatbots applications with just a few lines of code.



Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.

