Opens in a new window Opens an external website Opens an external website in a
new window
<!---->Close this dialog<!---->
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site
functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted
advertising purposes. To learn more, view the following link:



<!---->Close Cookie Preferences<!---->


Product
Solutions
Resources
Company



LAUNCH PRODUCTION-GRADE ARCHITECTURES USING PINECONE'S VECTOR DATABASE IN
MINUTES WITH THE AWS REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE

Nov 27, 2023 - in Engineering
Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F8f66c8410d14247e66c68467afa7870768ed147b-460x460.png&w=3840&q=100]

Staff Developer Advocate

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pinecone’s vector database scales to billions of vectors and returns queries in
milliseconds.

We’ve heard from customers that our and example applications are ideal for
hands-on learning and exploring new AI techniques, but it’s less clear how to go
to production with AI applications leveraging Pinecone’s vector database at
scale.

So today, we’re going beyond examples and open-sourcing our , defined via
Infrastructure as Code with . In minutes, users can deploy high-scale systems
using Pinecone in their AWS accounts.

You can also read our .



Pinecone's AWS Reference Architecture schematic
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/93a90590233e0b207777a694ddab323077fab751-1720x1029.png]



The Reference Architecture has been tested with batches ranging from 10,000 to 1
million records. It is the fastest way to deploy production-ready systems
leveraging Pinecone’s vector database at scale.


TRY IT OUT!

The Pinecone AWS Reference Architecture is open-source and free to use. We have
focused on getting the system up and running in your AWS account as quickly as
possible.

Launching the Pinecone AWS Reference Architecture requires setting three
environment variables you can get from a free Pinecone account and then running
`pulumi up.` The Reference Architecture takes around 14 and a half minutes to
deploy fully.

The Pinecone open-source team is standing by to support users, answer questions,
and respond to any issues.


WHAT IS THE PINECONE AWS REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE?

The Pinecone AWS Reference Architecture is a fully open-source, distributed
system defined in Pulumi and written in TypeScript.

You can run the system to understand our best practices and recommendations,
modify the code to your needs, and re-deploy a custom system to help you get
your applications into production more quickly.

The Pinecone AWS Reference Architecture encodes best practices for both AWS and
Pinecone.

It demonstrates a high-scale distributed system that uses a queue to fan out
work as well as networking and security group separation of infrastructure, ECS
services for the frontend and backend microservices, and autoscaling configured
to expand the worker pool up and down elastically in response to system load.


WHAT DOES THE PINECONE AWS REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE HELP YOU DO?

The Pinecone AWS Reference Architecture is the ideal starting point for teams
building production systems using Pinecone’s vector database for high-scale use
cases.

Vector databases are core infrastructure for Generative AI, and the Pinecone AWS
Reference Architecture is the fastest way to deploy a scalable cloud-native
architecture.

Since the architecture is defined as code, users can modify it to their specific
needs or requirements quickly without having to start from scratch.

Pinecone’s vector database can scale to billions of vectors, and the AWS
Reference Architecture uses a job queue and automatically scales workers out and
in to elastically process spiking workloads.

The architecture can be used as written or modified in TypeScript to fit any use
case that requires processing a large amount of data.

Pinecone provides an easy-to-use API for all vector database operations,
including creating new indexes, upserting embeddings, and querying for nearest
neighbor results.

Pinecone’s AWS Reference Architecture includes three microservices written in
TypeScript using the latest Pinecone Node.js SDK to demonstrate how to
provision, query, and instantly update Pinecone indexes.

The Reference Architecture also contains sample applications
[https://cdn.sanity.io/images/vr8gru94/production/5767bd7ede50676d294ad39a37a54708e1a3a3b5-1024x1024.png]



They’re ideal for learning or modifying to get your use case into production
more quickly.

For a more detailed explanation of the Reference Architecture’s components and
how they fit together, see our technical walkthrough.


GIVE IT A SHOT!

In addition to the guides included in, we also have which includes:


 * Setup and initial configuration, required tool installation
 * Deploying the Reference Architecture
 * Understanding what is deployed
 * Autoscaling
 * Deploying a jump host to interact with private resources such as the RDS
   database
 * Destroying the deployed Reference Architecture

Share via:


FURTHER READING


Author
[/_next/image/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcdn.sanity.io%2Fimages%2Fvr8gru94%2Fproduction%2F8f66c8410d14247e66c68467afa7870768ed147b-460x460.png&w=3840&q=100]

Staff Developer Advocate

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to section
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 

Share via:


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


WHAT WILL YOU BUILD?

Upgrade your search or chatbots applications with just a few lines of code.



Product

Solutions

Resources

Company

Legal


© Pinecone Systems, Inc. | San Francisco, CA

Pinecone is a registered trademark of Pinecone Systems, Inc.

[/_next/image/?url=%2F_next%2Fstatic%2Fmedia%2Fpopup-bg.197eeb2c.png&w=3840&q=100]


INTRODUCING — PINECONE SERVERLESS

Build knowledgeable AI at up to 50x lower cost. No need to manage
infrastructure. Get started with $100 in usage credits.

